I want to tell you where we got to in
our national fight back against Corona
the corona virus today the scientific
advisory group of emergencies met to
discuss the latest evidence on the
spread of the virus and the effects of
the measures we have already taken to
slow its spread and Patrick is going to
update us in a second about that I want
to repeat that everyone everyone must
follow the advice to protect themselves
and their families but also more
importantly to protect the wider public
so stay at home for seven days if you
think you have the symptoms remember the
two key symptoms a high temperature a
continuous new cough whole household to
stay at home for 14 days if one member
of that household thinks he/she has the
symptoms avoid all unnecessary
gatherings pubs clubs bars restaurants
theaters and so on work from home if you
can wash your hands and we've already
announced in the last few days we will
massively scale up our testing capacity
in the weeks ahead so that we hit 25,000
tests a day huge public information
campaign is being rolled out so people
get all the information they need we
need to protect ourselves and others
were asking retired healthcare
professionals to come back and help us
help the NHS to cope with this
unprecedented challenge and we will
continue as we have from the beginning
to do the right thing at the right time
and to follow the best scientific advice
and we come today to the key issue of
schools where we've been consistently
advised that there is an important
trade-off and so far the judgment of our
advisors has been that closing schools
is actually of limited value in slowing
the spread of the epidemic and that's
partly because counterintuitive these
schools are actually very safe
environments and in this disease in this
epidemic children
young people are much less vulnerable
and hitherto the advice has been that we
should keep schools open if possible in
order to reduce the pressure on the NHS
and and on all other public services but
I think you'll agree that I've always
been very clear this is a balanced
judgement and one that we've kept under
constant review so looking at the curve
of the disease and looking at where we
are now we think now that we must apply
downward pressure further downward
pressure on that upward curve by closing
the school so I can announce today and
Gavin Williamson is making a statement
now in that in the House of Commons that
after schools shut their gates from
Friday afternoon they will remain closed
for most pupils for the vast majority of
pupils until further notice and I'll
come to I'll explain what I mean by the
vast majority of pupils the objective is
to slow the spread of the virus and as I
say we judge that this is the right
moment to do that but of course as I've
always said we also need to keep the NHS
going and to treat the rising number of
cases so we need health workers who are
also parents to continue to go to work
and we need other critical workers with
children to keep doing their jobs - from
police officers who are keeping our safe
to the supermarket delivery drivers
social care workers who look after the
elderly and who are so vital we'll be
setting out more details shortly about
who we mean whom we mean in these groups
so we therefore need schools to make
provision for the children of these key
workers who would otherwise be forced to
stay home and they will also need to
look after the most vulnerable children
this will mean that there would cause be
far fewer children in the schools and
that will help us to slow the spread of
disease and these measures are crucial
to make sure that the as I say the
critical parts of the economy keep
functioning and public services keep
functioning
so we're simultaneously asking nurseries
and private schools to do the same and
we're providing financial support where
it's needed we're making provisions to
supply meals and vouchers for children
eligible for free school meals and where
some schools are already doing this I
want to make it clear that we will
reimburse the cost and of course this
does mean that exams will not take place
as planned in May and June though we
will make sure that pupils get the
qualifications they need and deserve for
their academic career now I know that
these steps will not be easy for parents
or for teachers and for many parents
this will be frustrating and it will
make it harder for them to go out to
work and of course that's one of the
reasons that we haven't wanted to go
ahead and that's why we're now working
on further measures to ensure that we
support not just businesses but also
individuals and their families to keep
our economy going as Ritchie soon Act
the Chancellor outlined yesterday I also
need to remind parents as we've already
advised that children should not be left
with older grandparents or older
relatives who may be particularly
vulnerable you have fallen into some of
the vulnerable groups and I want to I
know that's going to be difficult too
and I want to thank families for their
sacrifice at this difficult time and I
want to thank the whole country for the
efforts that people are making to comply
with these measures I particularly want
to thank teachers head teachers all the
support staff who keep schools going who
are going to be able to make these
exceptional arrangements work for the
benefit of us all by looking after the
children of key workers they will be a
critical part of our fight back against
coronavirus and as I've said we will
take the right steps at the right time
guided by the science we believe the
steps we've already taken together with
those I'm announcing today are already
slowing the spread of the disease but we
will not hesitate to go further and
faster in the days and weeks ahead and
we will do whatever it takes so that we
beat it together and I'm not going too
fast I think toeb to Patrick to give an
update from sages point of view thank
you
overriding consideration has always save
lives protect the most vulnerable people
from this illness the vast majority of
people have a mild illness but some get
a very severe illness the measures that
were announced a couple of days ago we
already know are taking effect in terms
of behavior so we can see that already
that people have actually taken that
very seriously and have made a
difference and that's really important
to carry on with that but the thing we
must protect in order to achieve those
aims of saving lives and protecting
people is to make sure that the NHS
intensive care capacity and the
ventilator capacity is not breached
that's what we need to keep looking at
making sure we do not get to a position
where that's breached as this moves fast
and I alluded to this on Monday more
measures will be needed to make sure
that happens and right from the
beginning we said schools are one of the
things you can do but they're less
important than some of the others that
have been taken but we now think with a
stage where this extra bit is an
important measure to make sure we stay
under that critical protecting the NHS
ICU and ventilator capacity so that's
the reason for now saying that this
should go ahead at this time it's
important to stress and this is really
critical it's not because schools are
dangerous places for children they're
not children have a very mild or
asymptomatic version of this disease in
many cases so they are at the least at
risk it
also not a dangerous place for teachers
the reason for this is because of the
effect it can have just to knock down
further the transmission the put some
delay into the system put some brakes
into the system of the transmission of
this disease to bring it down to protect
those people who might get them much
more serious version and end up in
intensive care or on a ventilator so
that's the reason now it's important
time to do it it's not instead of and it
can't supplement the other measures the
other measures are crucially important
and we all have our part to play to make
sure that we make make those measures as
effective as possible to try to drive
this right down and make sure we stay
below that critical threshold thank you
thank you so much Patrick from your
point of view so I think nothing very
much further to add to those points
exactly the practices explained this is
not a change in the scientific position
which we've always taken forward it is
very much a practical response at a
critical time as both Prime Minister and
Patrick as has indicated but very happy
to answer any clinical questions that
comes okay Axl well thank you thank you
very much Jenny let's let's go let's go
straight to to you and for your
questions on this hundred Beth Revis guy
news prime minister just in terms of
further measures a third of the deaths
and now in the capital of London buses
are still full the tubes are full bars
are full London is not listening to your
advice you've shut the schools today
when will we see wider enforcement to
shut down London properly and if I may
just on the antibodies test after quite
difficult days and frightening news
something a bit more encouraging today
you talked about getting closer to an
antibodies test to tell us whether
people have had the virus when will it
be ready and what sort of impact could
it have could it be a game-changer in
helping us manage this disease and
keeping our emergency services running
thank you yeah
thank you very much and look we've
always said that we're going to we're
going to do the right measures at the
right time that's what we've that's what
we've done and in action I think people
a lot of people are making a real heroic
effort to comply with the advice that
we've given but as I've said tonight and
in past few days we keep everything
under continuous review and we will not
hesitate to bring forward further and
faster measures where we think that is
that is necessary but on the on the
antibodies and so two times the tests
are important the tests to say have you
got the active virus and that's being
rapidly scaled up by public health
England and that's crucially important
Oh who's actively got it at the moment
the second one is you allude to is the
antibody test which tells you whether
you've had it and whether you've now got
antibodies against it and that's
progressing very fast public health
England they're looking at this today
and they've got a test which they've got
in-house that they're going and we're
looking at ways to get a much more
widespread version of that out it is a
game changer and the reason it's a game
changer is that it allows you to
understand the proportion of the
asymptomatic population who's had this
disease but hasn't had symptoms that are
in any way significant and we don't have
that number accurately for anywhere in
the world at the moment so if we can get
that number it starts to really help and
going forward it's going to be
critically important if we have to
monitor this disease well because only
if I begin to monitor it can we start
relaxing measures again start
understanding what the effect of taking
things off again at some point is so
this is all part of a critical ability
to manage this as an agile way going
forward just to say that I think exactly
so patrick has said it is actually not
just our health workforce it's our care
workforce as well and the other measures
that we've introduced particularly to
protect the vulnerable when we have a
matched workforce if you like where we
are clearly aware of their antibody
status whether they have had the disease
and are therefore safe to work with our
vulnerable group that increases our
opportunities around our interventions
and everybody can see
the immense advantages the thing about
this this disease it's an invisible
enemy and we don't know who's
transmitting it but the great thing
about having a tester to see whether
you've had it on or just suddenly you
know a green light goes on above your
your head you can get you can go back to
work in the safe and confident and not
in the knowledge that you're your most
unlikely to get it again so from an
economic point of view from a social
point of view as Sir Patrick says it
really could be a game-changer it's
important not to to get ahead of
ourselves you know we're not there we're
not there yet but you know you really
can see the potential of that advance
which is as I say coming down the track
let's go to Laurel Coons back from the
BBC and thank you very much prime
minister and you were very eager to
avoid closing schools if you possibly
could but now you have taken that
decision and families will wonder maybe
more than anything else tonight how long
these closures might last can you give
us any indication the Scottish
government has suggested maybe six
months until the summer holidays and to
the medics if I may you have touched on
this or Patrick but in the simplest
clearest of terms if schools are to be
closed to slow the spread why are they
safe places for any child or any member
of staff on the duration Laura obviously
we're going to try to keep it to an
absolute minimum Z as you can imagine to
keep it of truant and get things going
again as fast as we can but our judgment
right now is that this is the moment to
provide further downward pressure as I
say on that upwards trajectory of the of
the virus by taking and taking that step
for epidemiological reasons alone
whilst doing what we can as I said to
protect our ability to keep the NHS
going by delivering care and education
for the key workers we think this is the
right moment to do it I wish I could
give you an answer about how long it
will be Laura but we've got to do it
right now so two sets of measures one
are about making sure all of the all of
us are protected which is about reducing
transmission second is about protecting
those people most at risk and this falls
into the category
the first it's about making sure that we
stop transmission reduce transmission
and children are not forgetting the
series form of this illness they are
very mild often asymptomatic and
therefore don't have a big risk around
each other they also may not spread it
as much we don't know that yet we don't
know the exact spread of this it's not
like influenza that that seems to be
clearer but we don't know exactly how
that works so this is about a measure to
protect all of us it's not a measure
because there's some specific risk to
children Thanks the whole approach is to
reduce the social contact throughout
society and we have taken the measures
which maximize the impact to health and
our safety whilst minimizing those to
the way that we live this measure
moves that on a small amount as we've
said but as as the practical said is not
to do with the the safety of the
children it's simply about a background
level of the numbers of social contacts
that we have thanks she had coli TB
Prime Minister you mentioned that exams
will now be canceled there will be
plenty of students who are about and
preparing to take their GCSEs and
a-levels their college six forum places
their university places and job offers
will be contingent on those exams what
measures are you taking on that also if
I may you mentioned you want to increase
the number of tests to 25,000 a day will
people still need to go to hospital to
take those tests especially if they're
not showing symptoms what do you advise
people to do okay well thanks very very
much
first of all on on exams and on you know
the ambitions the hopes of students
pupils in our in our schools I totally
understand people's frustrations the
frustrations of parents who are going to
feel now that they have to to stay at
home and as I said earlier we're going
to make sure that we look after workers
of all kinds but when it comes to kids
in there and their exam qualifications
we will make sure that they are not
impeded their progress is not impeded as
a result of the decisions
we're having to take now about their
schools there so they will get we will
make sure that in time they get the
qualifications they need I don't want to
go in detail about when and how those
qualifications will be administered but
it will be done fairly and in order to
protect their interests I think well
there's a very good question about where
shab asked about what in a where the
testing would take place and I mean I
think there's a lot of progress we're
gonna be making on that the testing is
about people in hospital with
respiratory illness people in intensive
care units
it's about outbreaks in a in an area and
it's about making sure that we can test
those who are most vulnerable or need
particular particular protection now as
you get more tests of course you can
roll out more more people under those
categories and it's important that we
don't know with everyone who coming to
hospital to be tested for all the
reasons we've talked about before so as
the increase in capacity comes online
there will be ways of testing which
don't require people to go to hospital I
don't know if Jenny you want to say any
more about that yes so we'll see that
reflects I think the position that we're
in at the moment we've stepped up our
current testing capacity moving towards
25,000 a day and another group in that
is very much as we start putting on the
the question that Beth raised earlier is
about actually acknowledging that we
need to retain and know that we are
using safe clinical staff so that's
another group excuse me but as we go
forward we will be very much have an
ambition to have some sort of home-based
test for the very reason which has been
described here which is we don't want
potentially infectious people arriving
in hospitals but we recognized that the
public and particularly our key workers
want to understand their health status
so that they can get back to normal
activities so a lot of work on that
ongoing and I think huge progress made
in the last few weeks Thanks
I got Jim Picard Dan you didn't pick on
yeah thank you Jim prime minister you've
got the emergency legislation coming out
tomorrow and it's reported that there's
a plan to lift the current cap on how
much money you can invest in struggling
industry
he's currently at 12 billion pounds is
that the case and does that signal
there's gonna be another multi billion
pound investment in industries such as
Airlines well Jim thanks very much as
the Chancellor said yesterday we're
going to hear a big package of 330
billion pounds by which the government
will stand behind companies as they go
through this this tough time stand
behind their their lenders make sure
that we keep their lenders going and
though there is already a big package as
you know about 20 billion to support
business directly in in cash terms
25,000 grants for SMEs 10,000 for the
for the smallest businesses but your
your your point is a is a good one and
we will continue to look at the steps
that may be necessary to support good
companies that are now facing
difficulties through no fault of their
own and we certainly will be doing
whatever it takes to help those
companies through tough times because
I'm absolutely convinced that the UK
economy will come back will come back
very strongly and when it does we want
those companies to be in the best
possible position to take advantage
Heather Stewart the Guardian Heather
Stewart from The Guardian and there will
be thousands of workers who will have
been laid off within hours and days of
your Monday announcement who worked in
the pubs and the gyms and the theaters
that you've told people to stay away
from many of those will be in rented
accommodation and they will probably
have been listening to the package
yesterday from where she stood out to
hear if there might be some help and
wondering what on earth to say to their
landlords about the fact that they might
not be able to make this news or next
month's rent can you do something more
for them absolutely thanks Heather and
as I said in the house this this morning
we will be bringing forward legislation
which will help renters
prevent them from suffering no-fault
evictions that that kind of thing
we will want to protect people who face
difficulties as I say through through no
fault of their own we cannot penalize
people for doing the right thing nor can
we penalize people when you have an
economic upset that is the the direct
result of the government the
government's actions government's advice
which are intended to protect the public
everybody who experiences that kind of
disciplic a ssin that kind of disruption
is entitled as I said yesterday to to
protection and support and that's what
we will provide okay Tom Tony I'm done
Thank You Prime Minister on closing of
the schools can you say is this a
mandatory thing you're doing are they
will they be required by law to do this
and what about the schools that have
already closed will they be required to
reopen if to teach the key workers you
just said very sorry very very quick the
secondary one the brexit transition
period the country clearly wants you to
focus on dealing with current crisis
what you are doing will you rule out
extending the transition period here now
or might that be something you want to
consider in the future Tom first of all
on on schools think clearly the the
government is will be closing the
schools and we have the the power to do
that when it comes to to private schools
we have I believe we have the same
powers obviously we will work to ensure
that crashes and so forth are are
properly compensated and as for the the
provision for a nursery the property
comes as for the provision for the the
vulnerable and for the key workers in
the schools that have already closed we
will work to ensure that they you know
where necessary
they provide those facilities as well as
other schools I think watching you
possibly need to imagine is that as we
go down the track since there will only
be a minority
a small minority of pupils going forward
in the future who being continuously
looked after by schools there may be an
overall reduction in the number of
schools who are providing any kind of
type of service at all if you if you saw
what I'm saying there may be some
rationalization so that not every school
is providing the service for four key
workers and for and for the for the bar
well if you said but that's on Monday
what we want if possible this for all
children in those sectors still to go to
their schools if you if you are in those
groups still to go to their schools if
you if you if you said on Monday just to
clarify that it's important that
children of key workers pupils of key
worker parents and we'll be identifying
those groups we'll be sending out more
in in in very very shortly those pupils
should turn up to their school and
vulnerable kids vulnerable pupils as
well I hope that's that's clear and you
had another question what was it about
there's another subject what was it if
the subject has been banished it's been
done it's it's been it's I see I it's
not a subject that's being regularly
discussed I can tell you in Downey's
feed at the moment and we're getting on
with you know there are legislators
legislation in place that I have no
intention of changing Hugo guy from I
news Thank You Prime Minister following
on from best question is there any
intention to bring in legal restrictions
on when where or how people can travel
around whether that's specifically in
London or more broadly well thanks you
go we we live in a land of of liberty as
you know and it's one of the great
features of our lives that we don't tend
to impose those sorts of restrictions on
on people in this in this country but I
have to tell you we will
nothing and we will certainly wish to
consider bringing forward further and
faster measures where that is necessary
to suppress the peak of the epidemic to
protect our NHS to minimize casualties
and to minimize suffering that is that
is our objective okay thank you again
there's a last question I'm afraid for
this round folks but there are going to
be more of these sessions as you as you
know so last question goes to Charlotte
Ivers a talk radio Thank You Prime
Minister and Sir Patrick it appears
people are quite reluctant to follow
this advice as Beth mentioned earlier
can I ask if your modelling of the
results takes that into account and
secondly Prime Minister how would you
describe the people who aren't taking
the advice and social distancing are
they being immoral so the modelling does
take into account that not everyone's
going to follow it but a very high
proportion need to and that means we all
need to really focus on this because the
moment we say well it's not for me it's
for somebody else and the compliance of
this goes down the less effective is
going to be and the reason this is
important I can't stress this enough is
to make sure that the NHS ICU capacity
is kept in a way that we don't breach it
and the ventilators are available to do
this so when we don't adhere to this
we're actually putting lots of people at
risk we're putting those sickest
patients at risk and so it's crucial
that this isn't taken as soft advice but
is taken as a really clear instruction
to do this if we're going to make sure
that we protect the lives of others I
want to to wrap up by answering your
question because it's a very profound
and important question Charlotte and of
course people must take their own
decisions and I'm a believer as I say in
in in freedom but let's be an absolutely
no doubt that these are very very
important choices that we're now making
in our daily lives and the more closely
in the more strictly the more ruthlessly
we can enforce upon ourselves our
families the advice that we're getting
about avoiding unnecessary gatherings
about staying at home when we have
symptoms all that advice which is good
advice then the better we will be able
to protect our NHS the fewer deaths we
will have and the less suffering there
will be in the UK population and the
faster we will get through this and the
the better we will bounce back
eventually so it is a very very clear
choice for people this is strong strong
advice and as I say and to get back to
to Beth's initial question absolutely we
do not rule out because it would be
quite wrong to do so we do not rule out
taking further and faster measures in
due course thank you all very much for
coming on this evening thank you
[Music]
you